[RFC 0136] A plan to stabilize the new CLI and Flakes incrementally (#136)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0136-stabilize-incrementally.md

This plan is designed to still efficiently end the current "limbo" era of these unstable yet widely-used features, yet also soothe the longstanding tensions in the Nix community over how we got here.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

For the past few years, we've accumulated a massive backlog of unstable features in the form of the new command-line interface and flakes.
There is now a growing desire to stabilize those features, but as of yet no plan on exactly how to do so.
The tension between that desire and a lack of a clear plan has loomed over our heads for a while; this RFC aims to dispel it by providing a concrete plan, an plan that hopefully will mitigate the lingering controversies and tensions around Flakes.

## The situation so far

There are a few facts that must be introduced to give context to this situation.
We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live wit them instead.x

### Flakes are very popular

As measured in the community polls, Nix has a lot of new users, dwarfing the number of long-time users.
Flakes is very popular among these new users.
Ergo, Flakes is very popular among the Nix community as a whole.

> Like it or not, these users have been using Flakes as if it was stable, and we cannot make huge drastic changes that would break their code in hard-to-fix ways.

Reviewer: This is the crux of the issue, and I can't agree with it.

Going into an effort to stabilise Flakes with the understanding that we can't actually change it very much would make a mockery of the RFC process as a whole.  It would establish a precedent that following the RFC process is optional, and that if you don't want to follow it (and you're one of the privileged set of committers to the appropriate repository) you can work around it encouraging adoption of your "experimental" work until it gets to the point that "we can't make big changes" any more.  Maybe the Flakes design is good enough that we wouldn't _need_ to make huge drastic changes, but it still sets the same precedent if we go into it having accepted that we _can't_.

Reviewer 2: One of the early breakages of the `nix` CLI was that it got hidden behind the `--experimental-features` flag. Exactly to address this concern and clarify that everything behind it is experimental. Even all the nix man pages say that it's experimental.

It's good that people are trying flakes because it provides feedback, but it seems pretty obvious to me that anything can be changed. There is no guarantee here.

Reviewer 3: The [1 year Nix roadmap the NixOS foundation is working on](https://nixos-foundation.notion.site/1-year-roadmap-0dc5c2ec265a477ea65c549cd5e568a9) contains an ominous reference to “start thinking about Flakes 2.0.” This will hopefully be clarified until NixCon, but it seems like breaking Flakes (in some controlled way, presumably) is already on the cards.

Author: I think Flakes 2.0 may not necessary be new features.

@alyssais I agree Flakes was advertised much more heavily than, say, Rust experimental features, which does make the whole process very dodgy. But I have also long since given up on trying to influence Flakes. @edolstra and others have a very specific vision on what UX they want for them, and I think a fine compromise is that they can basically do whatever they want with that *so long as* there remains a "rest of Nix" that is still fully functional and not an afterthought with huge gaps.

In other words, I would *personally* work very hard to make sure the first two round of stabilizations under the plan yield a good result, making requests for some small tweak dyed-in-the-whole Flakers find baffling or boring. But then for the 3rd round, I would largely bow out, having gotten the things I wanted.

Now, I am by no means demanding that persons besides myself do the same; there is still a 3rd round of stabilization for those interested in Flakes to voice their thoughts. But I gather a lot of the tensions around Flakes is predicated on a fear that Flakes will be the only way forward, with the non-Flakes functionality legacy stuff or otherwise left to rot. I think by making sure that the non-Flakes stuff is still good, or at least leaving room for that (e.g. we can rename `nix search` to `nix flake search` leaving room for the future re-emergence of Flake-agnostic searching) we can lower the temperature a lot in the room not only for people like me, but also for people that still care about Flakes being good (in their eyes) but can rest easier with there being a "plan B".

Reviewer 4: I would say that pushing flakes through an imitation RFC process without properly addressing the criticism would damage RFC process without really adding anything to flakes (hard to get extra credibility from the process that just lost its credibility).

I guess with incremental stabilisation of Flakes we could reach a state where some things can neither be stabilised via an RFC nor removed via an RFC? I don't like this outcome too much, but maybe this would at least reduce the splash damage…

(From experience, I am pessimistic about making consistent good decisions about issues, but somewhat optimistic about compartmentalising the damage)

Reviewer: Yeah, regardless of how important flakes is to any of us, we all have an interest in protecting the RFC process, and that means we all have an interest in making sure that flakes follows it properly (and so doesn't go into the process with things already having been set in stone).

Author: Those are good points. I too am very interested in upholding the RFC process, even though I don't feel like burning political capital trying to influence Flakes.

Reviewer 5: > _so long as_ there remains a "rest of Nix"

Well, [so much for that idea](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/7156/commits/8e898ced0a4570c4522ef475ade2cf29e6bdb3b0#r992325473).  It was a good one though.

Reviewer 4: > Well, so much for that idea. It was a good one though.

Well, don't underestimate the room for discussion based on a single comment on a completely pie-in-the-sky vision, either

Reviewer 6: > Yeah, regardless of how important flakes is to any of us, we all have an interest in protecting the RFC process, and that means we all have an interest in making sure that flakes follows it properly (and so doesn't go into the process with things already having been set in stone).

The RFC process continues to be in effect. A single topic having been shown to be difficult to handle does not invalidate it. That is why the project has different ways to organize, each able to handle problems and make decisions in different ways. This RFC proposes an incremental approach that seems to be desirable regardless of the historical context behind flakes development. I see it as a call to unite behind a common goal.

Reviewer 4: > The RFC process continues to be in effect. A single topic having been shown to be difficult to handle does not invalidate it.

True as long as 

> That is why the project has different ways to organize, each able to handle problems and make decisions in different ways. This RFC proposes an incremental approach that seems to be desirable regardless of the historical context behind flakes development. 

> I see it as a call to unite behind a common goal.

I hope it is not. I hope we clearly acknowledge that we _do not_ have a universally shared goal for flakes so that compromises can be discussed honestly, as tradeoffs between conflicting values.

Author: @7c6f434c The common goal would be stabilizing the flakes-agnostic CLI.

Reviewer 4: Even there, I think some people want `nix profile` to work (without flakes; but also whether it working at all is good or bad is likely to have less than 100% agreement)

Reviewer 7: @alyssais I agree. Saying "flakes are widely used, so we can't break interfaces even if they're not declared stable" is flawed reasoning. @tomberek recently pointed out to me that leading figures have been encouraging users to adopt flakes since NixCon 2019. And it still happens in side channels all the time, new users being introduced with *literally* saying "it's fine, just enable experimental features, it's the right way to do things" or "it's strongly encouraged" – by whom?

These are people's opinions, they are free to have them, and others are free to believe them, but the manual and the guards in the code clearly state: this interface is subject to change. 

Don't rely on experimental features in production, unless you know what you're doing and know how to get yourself out of a mess. [There is no deadline on stabilising the new CLI or flakes, because we don't want to get stuck with what we may end up regretting.](https://www.youtube.com/live/yXPQdZh8o7c?feature=share&t=958)

I'm not in the position to conclusively judge and not willing to opine whether the new CLI design or the flakes paradigm of organising Nix projects are the right way forward and whether the improvements in user experience are worth the sunk cost. But I'm confident with stating that the kind of signaling and narrative we have observed
1. Confuses beginners, produces uncertainty, and associates these negative emotions with the project, which tend to stick due to the [primacy effect](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial-position_effect#Primacy_effect)
2. Reinforces distrust in Nix maintainers among new users, who we can expect soon to be the overwhelming majority
3. Exerts needless constraints and pressure on maintainers where the whole point of experimental features is, well, to be able to experiment, and therefore having the freedom to make breaking changes.

Author: This sentence is now removed!

Reviewer 8: > And it still happens in side channels all the time, new users being introduced with literally saying "it's fine, just enable experimental features, it's the right way to do things" or "it's strongly encouraged" – by whom?

I won't even read non-flake tutorials I must say because it feels like the old way of doing things.

I'd say, why not both? It's fine to point new people to flakes if that's easier to get them onboarded (which many people believe it is) **and** even then it's fine to massively break flakes in the future if you get the design right.

Many Groups and individuals interested in the continued growth the Nix community see Flakes are popular, an also wish it to be stabilized to attract further still more users, since Flakes are already proven to be popular among users.

### Difficulties in the roll-out

It is undeniable that the roll-out of these new features has been controversial.
Graham Christensen's blog post [flakes-are-an-obviously-good-thing](https://grahamc.com/blog/flakes-are-an-obviously-good-thing) lays out the procedure issues along the way quite well.

Some people were upset the Flakes RFC was abandoned but the feature merged.
Other people were fine with experimental features being merged without RFC, but were upset because Flakes never really *felt* experimental.
Experimental features would be modified a lot subject to community design use, and, most importantly, *discouraged* from being used in production.

> ### Flakes are criticized for encroaching on other features

Reviewer 5: A while back I took the time to read the entire, massive [Flakes RFC discussion](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49).

If you're going to try to summarize that discussion here, you should mention the [problem of the "global registry"](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49#discussion_r304059813), which seemed like a much bigger problem than any "encroachment".  These registries cause power struggles proportional to the success of their community.

Author: Yeah maybe. That is however an issue that is sort of orthogonal to the plan here? I hope that successful stabilization of the earlier stuff will generally lower the temperature on debating things with Flakes in come stabilization time *in general*, but I must admit I am not sure how my plan helps with that issue *in particular*.

Maybe though if only a portion of flakes is stabilized that could be drop?

Perhaps I will ask @alyssais what she thinks is best.

Reviewer 5: > That is however an issue that is sort of orthogonal to the plan here?

Presumably not, since the proposal to separate the registry from the flakes RFC was rejected.

> Perhaps I will ask @alyssais what she thinks is best.

She was the most eloquent exponent of that viewpoint but far from the only one.

Reviewer 4: > Presumably not, since the proposal to separate the registry from the flakes RFC was rejected.

I hope it is a reasonable option to decide that Flakes RFC was positioned «everything to stabilise about flakes» and thus separating the registry discussion would be against that approach, but this time we are trying to commit to things in an incremental way with smaller pieces (if only to avoid making GitHub UI utterly unusable) — thus the fundamentals can be stabilised in a few RFCs (like _what exactly_ is pure enough and how to use it reasonably even without flakes), and then even the flakes themselves could be multiple RFCs.

Reviewer: I am firm in my view that having an open global flake registry would be a very bad idea, for all the reasons that I've expressed before.  I don't think Flakes can be made non-experimental without first addressing the global registry elephant in the room, because we need to make sure that we avoid (to the extent we still can) the same problem we've encountered here, where people end up relying on behaviour that has never been through RFC, meaning that the result of any future RFC is a foregone conclusion.

Reviewer 9: Could we do a survey about the global registry?
I propose the following question:
What would you like the global registry to be?
- a curated list (status quo)
- nix and nixpkgs only
- empty list

Reviewer: Since the RFC (now?) says that stabilising Flakes itself will require further RFCs, the right place to bring up the global registry is on those future RFCs.  So I consider this discussion resolved with respect to this RFC.

Author: OK Thanks, will collapse.

There are many criticism about Flakes.
But one of them especially relevant to stabilizing is a perception that Flakes have encroached on other new features, in the sense that it ought to be possible to use them without Flakes but isn't in practice.
For example, there is no reason in theory pure eval requires Flakes, but without the ability to populate an initial whitelist of store paths that are safe to import it in practice does.

This is especially noticeable for new CLI features that *previously did*, in fact, work without Flakes.
For example, in earlier versions of Nix `nix search` worked without Flakes.

## A plan all sides can be happy with

Stabilizing the new CLI and Flakes will end the saga of the past few years.
It is a last good chance to sooth some of these tensions and put us on a good foot moving forward.

> The new NixOS Foundation gives me hope Nix is serious about addressing these sorts of governance issues, and thus would be a good way to further demonstrate we are turning a new leaf.

Reviewer 10: This is more of a style point, but I don't think an RFC should contain `I` sentences, i.e. sentences where the author is present in the first person.

In my opinion an RFC is different from a blog post in that regard, in that it's a place to propose an "object" for discussion, and this object is then evaluated by the community. It helps in this sense if the object is described in "objective" rather than "subjective" terms, removing unnecessary references to the author.

Basically more like a scientific paper than a discursive post.

Some might disagree and that's fine, just wanted to give a more meta-level feedback :)

Author: Yeah it's a hard problem where I don't want to "hog the floor" as the author but I don't want to appear as speak for others that might disagree.

Happy to do "I" -> "the authors" or something else, do propose suggestions!

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
The new NixOS Foundation gives the RFC authors hope Nix is serious about addressing these sorts of governance issues, and thus would be a good way to further demonstrate we are turning a new leaf.
```

Threads on Flakes in the past have been impossible to follow because the sheer magnitude of different topics being discussed.
Small stabilization steps are meant to yield *focused, bounded* discussions that actually read well.
This also ensures any issues that do arise are actually brought to attention, and not lost within a deluge of other topics.

### Benefit 2: Build trust by starting with the least controversial material.

Flakes are obviously the most controversial, and so they are saved for last.
The CLI is more broadly popular, but still is a lot of material to discuss.
The store-only subcommands are Nix's "plumbing" as opposed to "porcelain" commands, and thus have the simplest (if not most user-friendly) purposes.
This "dusty corner" off the new CLI is rather calm with a very constrained design space, and far less acrimony.

## Conclusion

By starting with these relatively easy material to stabilize, we can prove we can all come together as a community to agree on a design after all.
This should build trust between opposing individuals and factions, giving us a foundation upon which to tackle the more challenging material in subsequent steps.

> since these features became very popular while they are still unstable, there is now both an urgency to stabilize them, and little ability to modify them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since these features became very popular while they are still unstable, there is now both an urgency to stabilize them, and little ability to modify them.
```

This is the opposite of how experimental features are supposed to leisurely incubate with both plenty of flexibility to change them, and little rush to stabilize them until they feel ready.
But, there is little we can do about this at this point, an this RFC recognizes that fact and does *not* try to resist it.

But, we have crossed that Rubicon and there is no turning back; this RFC *doesn't* attempt to change Flakes or the command line 

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Step 1 is technical work, with a self-imposed deadline so we can be sure it doesn't delay stabilization too long.
The remaining steps are stabilization steps.
For each of them, a separate RFC or other discussion medium will describe the new interfaces to be stabilized, and solicit feedback.

## Step 1: Split out a store-only Nix, with deadline

This is the same as step one from [RFC 134](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/134), upon which this RFC depends.

A deadline is imposed to get that complete, so agreement on this stabilization plan is guaranteed not to add more than a small bounded delay as opposed to stabilizing everything immediately.

## Step 2: Stabilize the store-only Nix CLI

> If the deadline for step 1 is met, then we stabilize *just* the command-line interface of the store-only Nix command.

Reviewer 4: Actually, even if store-only Nix is not there, can `nix` command be stabilised area by area, probably with store-related commands first?

Reviewer 4: Actually current RFC #134 does not seem to require that eval-part of Nix goes only through the CLI-exposed part of store-Nix, does it?

Author: No it does not, but I meant making sure low level commands don't need high level library code.

Reviewer 4: But this doesn't really prove that the store-Nix is useful as plumbing without layering violations (like the current way of specifying a specific output), does it?

Author: @7c6f434c This feels like a "necessary vs sufficient" type distinction?

Enforcing a store-only Nix lets us figure out automatically which plumbing commands are virtuously not using higher level layer, but yes it won't tell us if those low level commands are sufficiently expressive. However I think merely having less items to review will allow us in a less automatic but human-driven way find where the gaps are. I would hope to finish my PR for the output selection problem too, for example.

Reviewer 4: If we don't have guarantees of layering either way, a fallback of just manually splitting the commands by semantic area doesn't feel pointless, just a slight reduction from non-perfect level of rigour to a bit lower non-perfect but non-useless level of rigour.

The commitment during the stabilisation is about the interface after all, so going semantic area by semantic area and ensuring consistency there sounds a reasonable approach. 

I am not opposing trying to make store-Nix and ideally later have evaluation-Nix not touching the store but through store-Nix! I am just saying that its failure should not doom step 2, it can be done on a different foundation as well.

Author: Oh OK, I thought you were saying we needed a more stringent process, but it sounds like you are saying the opposite. Sure, that makes sense.

Author: Sure I agree. I am hoping I get that prev RFC approved / PR done regardless and it's a non-issue, but if I fail then yes it is good that we can still stabilize things incrementally.

Reviewer 11: @7c6f434c It seems you're on the same page now. Maybe you can mark the conversation as resolved? That would make it easier to see if there's still something left to discuss or not.

## Flakes are very popular

And they will be stabilized, with minimal delay.

Firstly, there is no feature work proposed in the interim --- the splitting of Nix is just partitioning existing functionality, with some behind-the-scenes refactors needed to make that possible.
The deadline placed on that work also assuages those concerned about the current "limbo" that stabilization will be gotten to no matter what, even if the splitting fails, after a set amount of time.

## Difficulties in the roll-out

Process concerns are addressed by having a clear process, with clear outcomes, before any stabilization is begun.
That is the purpose of this RFC!

## Flakes are criticized for eating other Nix features

We do *not* propose adding delay to once-again separate those features from Flakes, as that would introduce more feature work which would delay stabilization and be unacceptable to the pro-Flakes faction.

That said, an ancillary incremental process of incremental stabilization is to bolster a *sense* of layering in Nix's user interface that has been, according to this camp, lost.

> Ensuring that the these two subsets of the new CLI --- without lakes, and without Nix language support --- do in fact make sense in isolation will provide a "scaffolding" upon which interested parties can later introduce generalized features like search and pure eval without Flakes.

Reviewer 12: ```diff
-Ensuring that the these two subsets of the new CLI --- without lakes, and without Nix language support --- do in fact make sense in isolation will provide a "scaffolding" upon which interested parties can later introduce generalized features like search and pure eval without Flakes.
+Ensuring that the these two subsets of the new CLI --- without Flakes, and without Nix language support --- do in fact make sense in isolation will provide a "scaffolding" upon which interested parties can later introduce generalized features like search and pure eval without Flakes.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Ensuring that the these two subsets of the new CLI --- without Flakes, and without Nix language support --- do in fact make sense in isolation will provide a "scaffolding" upon which interested parties can later introduce generalized features like search and pure eval without Flakes.
```

The hope is that such scaffolding will assuage this faction their concerns are heard without holding things up.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The main downside is a small delay from the splitting Nix process, and then delay between the stabilization steps.

The first delay has a guaranteed upper bound, thanks to its self-imposed deadline.
That maximum delay should be dwarfed by duration of time we've spent "in limbo" without a clear plan to move forward.
I therefore think that is a small and reasonable price to pay for the benefit of community harmony.

The second delays don't represent time "ideal" from a stabilization perspective.
As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, I don't see any problem.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

Of course, we could instead count on the magnitude of new years making the concerns of old users unimportant, but I think the plan here has little downsides; we can instead make everyone happy with only a small delay.
If that is true, why not do that instead!

> A plan to stabilize F

Reviewer: Did something go missing here?

Author: I think I actually just didn't finish the thought, whoops!

Author: ```suggestion
```

shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Stabilize the new command line interface and Flakes in an incremental fashion, leveraging [RFC 134](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/134).
This plan is designed to still efficiently end the current "limbo" era of these unstable yet widely-used features, yet also soothe the longstanding tensions in the Nix community over how we got here.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

For the past few years, we've accumulated a massive backlog of unstable features in the form of the new command-line interface and flakes.
There is now a growing desire to stabilize those features, but as of yet no plan on exactly how to do so.
The tension between that desire and a lack of a clear plan has loomed over our heads for a while; this RFC aims to dispel it by providing a concrete plan, an plan that hopefully will mitigate the lingering controversies and tensions around Flakes.

## The situation so far

There are a few facts that must be introduced to give context to this situation.

> We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live wit them instead.

Author: ```suggestion
We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live with them instead.
```

> We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live wit them instead.x

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live wit them instead.
```

Reviewer 14: `s/wit/with` here too?

### Difficulties in the roll-out

It is undeniable that the roll-out of these new features has been controversial.
Graham Christensen's blog post [flakes-are-an-obviously-good-thing](https://grahamc.com/blog/flakes-are-an-obviously-good-thing) lays out the procedure issues along the way quite well.

Some people were upset the Flakes RFC was abandoned but the feature merged.
Other people were fine with experimental features being merged without RFC, but were upset because Flakes never really *felt* experimental.
Experimental features would be modified a lot subject to community design use, and, most importantly, *discouraged* from being used in production.

### Flakes are criticized for encroaching on other features

There are many criticism about Flakes.
But one of them especially relevant to stabilizing is a perception that Flakes have encroached on other new features, in the sense that it ought to be possible to use them without Flakes but isn't in practice.

> For example, there is no reason in theory pure eval requires Flakes, but without the ability to populate an initial whitelist of store paths that are safe to import it in practice does.

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
For example, there is no reason in theory pure eval requires Flakes, but without the ability to populate an initial allow list of store paths that are safe to import it in practice does.
```

Author: ```suggestion
For example, there is no reason in theory pure eval requires Flakes, but without the ability to populate an initial list of store paths that are safe to import, pure eval in practice does.
```

This is especially noticeable for new CLI features that *previously did*, in fact, work without Flakes.
For example, in earlier versions of Nix `nix search` worked without Flakes.

## A plan all sides can be happy with

Stabilizing the new CLI and Flakes will end the saga of the past few years.

> It is a last good chance to sooth some of these tensions and put us on a good foot moving forward.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
It is a last good chance to soothe some of these tensions and put us on a good foot moving forward.
```

The new NixOS Foundation gives me hope Nix is serious about addressing these sorts of governance issues, and thus would be a good way to further demonstrate we are turning a new leaf.

The plan below attempts to make all sides happy, despite their seemingly irreconcilable differences.
The basic thrust is to proceed with stabilization in small steps.
Two benefits are envisioned:

### Benefit 1: Keep discussions on track.

> Threads on Flakes in the past have been impossible to follow because the sheer magnitude of different topics being discussed.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
[Threads on Flakes](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49) in the past have been impossible to follow because the sheer magnitude of different topics being discussed.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Threads on Flakes in the past, such as that for the [original RFC](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49), have been impossible to follow because the sheer magnitude of different topics being discussed.
```

Small stabilization steps are meant to yield *focused, bounded* discussions that actually read well.
This also ensures any issues that do arise are actually brought to attention, and not lost within a deluge of other topics.

### Benefit 2: Build trust by starting with the least controversial material.

Flakes are obviously the most controversial, and so they are saved for last.
The CLI is more broadly popular, but still is a lot of material to discuss.
The store-only subcommands are Nix's "plumbing" as opposed to "porcelain" commands, and thus have the simplest (if not most user-friendly) purposes.

> This "dusty corner" off the new CLI is rather calm with a very constrained design space, and far less acrimony.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This "dusty corner" of the new CLI is rather calm with a very constrained design space, and far less acrimony.
```

## Conclusion

> By starting with these relatively easy material to stabilize, we can prove we can all come together as a community to agree on a design after all.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
By starting with this relatively easy material to stabilize, we can prove we can all come together as a community to agree on a design after all.
```

This should build trust between opposing individuals and factions, giving us a foundation upon which to tackle the more challenging material in subsequent steps.

Since these features became very popular while they are still unstable, there is now both an urgency to stabilize them, and little ability to modify them.
This is the opposite of how experimental features are supposed to leisurely incubate with both plenty of flexibility to change them, and little rush to stabilize them until they feel ready.
But, there is little we can do about this at this point, an this RFC recognizes that fact and does *not* try to resist it.

> But, we have crossed that Rubicon and there is no turning back; this RFC *doesn't* attempt to change Flakes or the command line 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
But, we have crossed that Rubicon and there is no turning back; this RFC *doesn't* attempt to change Flakes or the command line.
```

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

Step 1 is technical work, with a self-imposed deadline so we can be sure it doesn't delay stabilization too long.
The remaining steps are stabilization steps.
For each of them, a separate RFC or other discussion medium will describe the new interfaces to be stabilized, and solicit feedback.

## Step 0: Stabilize the store-only installable-free CLI

> There are certain commands like `nix store gc`, `nix store ping` that do not take any positional arguments.

Reviewer 10: Is it in scope for the RFC to define the exact set of these commands (either by enumerating them, or by stating which property they need to have)? If not, where would this be done?

Author: I am not sure whether it is in-scope, but here is one such (WIP) list https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/7701

Author: Out of scope is better, thanks

> As @roberth elsewhere pointed out, because these commands have so few degrees of freedom, they are some of the easiest to stabilize --- there is simply less to pour over and possibly bikeshed.

Reviewer 10: > As @roberth elsewhere pointed out

Can we get a reference for this, or otherwise remove it? I don't think it adds any value to the argument as it is ;)

Author: I think it might be in Nix team meeting notes which are yet to be posted? Could just drop it I suppose just want to give @roberth credit for the idea :).

We can start stabilizing them right away, either in a batch, or one by one.

## Step 1: Split out a store-only Nix, with deadline

This is the same as step one from [RFC 134](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/134), upon which this RFC depends.

> A deadline is imposed to get that complete, so agreement on this stabilization plan is guaranteed not to add more than a small bounded delay as opposed to stabilizing everything immediately.

Author: It's gone now!

## Step 2: Stabilize the store-only Nix CLI

If the deadline for step 1 is met, then we stabilize *just* the command-line interface of the store-only Nix command.

This is a small portion of the total amount of interface we have to stabilize, and that will hopefully yield a narrow and more focused discussion.
Yet it will still offer some interesting topics to discus, such as:

- logging
- store paths on `stdout` at end of build?

> - Should commands like `show-derivation` should use `--json` by default

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- Should commands like `show-derivation` use `--json` by default
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Should commands like `show-derivation` use `--json` by default?
```

- Flat vs hierarchical commands
- is `--derivation` a good flag?

## Step 3: Stabilize the rest of the CLI, without Flakes

If the deadline for step 1 is *not* met, we jump directly to this step, skipping step 2.

> This is rest off the new CLI, without flakes.

Reviewer 10: > This is rest off the new CLI, without flakes.

I can't really parse this sentence. Should I read it as "This is **the** rest of the new CLI"?

Author: ```suggestion
This is the rest off the new CLI, without flakes.
```

> Unlike the store-only Nix command which has yet to be implemented, this is easy to visual today by enabling the `nix-command` feature without the `flakes` feature.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Unlike the store-only Nix command which has yet to be implemented, this is easy to visualize today by enabling the `nix-command` feature without the `flakes` feature.
```

This is a chance to discuss topics like:

- Is `--file` good, or should we be able to specify something like `file#attribute` to mix files and attributes? (Without using Flakes.)
- Should all outputs be selected if one writes `foo.dev`?
- How can `nix repl` have a more normal CLI?

## Step 4: Stabilize Flakes itself

> Finally, with the other less controversial interfaces stabilized, we can tackle the Flakes itself, the one remainder.

Reviewer 13: Is this thought of as a all-in-one thing (flake file format, registry, installables format, ..) or will we have seperate discussions on these topics? The old RFC covered a wide range of things (which wasn't great) so we might want do keep this in mind.

Author: Yeah I don't mean for this RFC to *preclude* further splitting up and incremental stabilizing, just obligate us to to *at least* try stabilizing these things first.

## Flakes are very popular

And they will be stabilized, with minimal delay.

Firstly, there is no feature work proposed in the interim --- the splitting of Nix is just partitioning existing functionality, with some behind-the-scenes refactors needed to make that possible.
The deadline placed on that work also assuages those concerned about the current "limbo" that stabilization will be gotten to no matter what, even if the splitting fails, after a set amount of time.

## Difficulties in the roll-out

Process concerns are addressed by having a clear process, with clear outcomes, before any stabilization is begun.
That is the purpose of this RFC!

## Flakes are criticized for eating other Nix features

We do *not* propose adding delay to once-again separate those features from Flakes, as that would introduce more feature work which would delay stabilization and be unacceptable to the pro-Flakes faction.

That said, an ancillary incremental process of incremental stabilization is to bolster a *sense* of layering in Nix's user interface that has been, according to this camp, lost.

> Ensuring that the these two subsets of the new CLI --- without Flakes, and without Nix language support --- do in fact make sense in isolation will provide a "scaffolding" upon which interested parties can later introduce generalized features like search and pure eval without Flakes.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Ensuring that these two subsets of the new CLI --- without Flakes, and without Nix language support --- do in fact make sense in isolation will provide a "scaffolding" upon which interested parties can later introduce generalized features like search and pure eval without Flakes.
```

Reviewer 10: Can you clarify what the "without Nix language support" subset of the new CLI is referring to?

Author: The would be the store-only CLI.

The hope is that such scaffolding will assuage this faction their concerns are heard without holding things up.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The main downside is a small delay from the splitting Nix process, and then delay between the stabilization steps.

The first delay has a guaranteed upper bound, thanks to its self-imposed deadline.
That maximum delay should be dwarfed by duration of time we've spent "in limbo" without a clear plan to move forward.

> I therefore think that is a small and reasonable price to pay for the benefit of community harmony.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
We therefore think that is a small and reasonable price to pay for the benefit of community harmony.
```

The second delays don't represent time "ideal" from a stabilization perspective.

> As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, I don't see any problem.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, we don't see any problem.
```

**Step 0** is also designed to take the pressure off these possible sources of delay, giving us *something* to work on that is not blocked on RFC 134 or anything else.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

We could, of course, just "rip off the band-aid" and stabilize everything at once.
The argument for that would be that enough time has passed and the concerns of (less numerous) long-time users are not important.

> But I think the plan here has little downsides; we can instead make everyone happy with only a small delay.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
But we think the plan here has little downsides; we can instead make everyone happy with only a small delay.
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

For the past few years, we've accumulated a massive backlog of unstable features in the form of the new command-line interface and flakes.
There is now a growing desire to stabilize those features, but as of yet no plan on exactly how to do so.
The tension between that desire and a lack of a clear plan has loomed over our heads for a while; this RFC aims to dispel it by providing a concrete plan, an plan that hopefully will mitigate the lingering controversies and tensions around Flakes.

## The situation so far

There are a few facts that must be introduced to give context to this situation.
We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live with them instead.

### Flakes are very popular

As measured in the community polls, Nix has a lot of new users, dwarfing the number of long-time users.
Flakes is very popular among these new users.
Ergo, Flakes is very popular among the Nix community as a whole.

Like it or not, these users have been using Flakes as if it was stable, and we cannot make huge drastic changes that would break their code in hard-to-fix ways.

> Many Groups and individuals interested in the continued growth the Nix community see Flakes are popular, an also wish it to be stabilized to attract further still more users, since Flakes are already proven to be popular among users.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Many Groups and individuals interested in the continued growth the Nix community see Flakes are popular, an also wish it to be stabilized to attract still more users, since Flakes are already proven to be popular among users.
```

### Difficulties in the roll-out

It is undeniable that the roll-out of these new features has been controversial.
Graham Christensen's blog post [flakes-are-an-obviously-good-thing](https://grahamc.com/blog/flakes-are-an-obviously-good-thing) lays out the procedure issues along the way quite well.

Some people were upset the Flakes RFC was abandoned but the feature merged.
Other people were fine with experimental features being merged without RFC, but were upset because Flakes never really *felt* experimental.

> Experimental features would be modified a lot subject to community design use, and, most importantly, *discouraged* from being used in production.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Experimental features are expected be modified a lot subject to community feedback, and, most importantly, *discouraged* from being used in production.
```

Is this what you wanted to say?

Author: ```suggestion
Experimental features are expected to be subject to community feedback, modified a lot based upon that feedback, and, most importantly, *discouraged* from being used in production.
```

### Flakes are criticized for encroaching on other features

There are many criticism about Flakes.
But one of them especially relevant to stabilizing is a perception that Flakes have encroached on other new features, in the sense that it ought to be possible to use them without Flakes but isn't in practice.

> For example, there is no reason in theory pure eval requires Flakes, but without the ability to populate an initial whitelist of store paths that are safe to import it in practice does.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For example, there is no reason in theory that pure evaluation if Nix expressions requires Flakes. But without the ability to populate an initial allow list of store paths that are safe to import, it in practice does.
```

Maybe link to the manual on that setting for people to find what that means?

Does it though? Why can't pure eval constrain paths to descendants of the CWD or something? It appears to me these considerations simply haven't been written down so I still have to ask questions that are probably stupid and have been answered multiple times over.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, there is no reason in theory that pure evaluation if Nix expressions requires Flakes.
But without the ability to populate some sort of initial list of store paths that are safe to import, pure evaluation in practice does require Flakes.
```

This is especially noticeable for new CLI features that *previously did*, in fact, work without Flakes.
For example, in earlier versions of Nix `nix search` worked without Flakes.

## A plan all sides can be happy with

Stabilizing the new CLI and Flakes will end the saga of the past few years.
It is a last good chance to soothe some of these tensions and put us on a good foot moving forward.

> The new NixOS Foundation gives the RFC authors hope Nix is serious about addressing these sorts of governance issues, and thus would be a good way to further demonstrate we are turning a new leaf.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The new NixOS Foundation gives the RFC authors hope that the Nix community is serious about addressing these sorts of governance issues, and accepting this RFC would be a good way to further demonstrate we are turning a new leaf.
```

Is this what you wanted to say?

Small stabilization steps are meant to yield *focused, bounded* discussions that actually read well.
This also ensures any issues that do arise are actually brought to attention, and not lost within a deluge of other topics.

### Benefit 2: Build trust by starting with the least controversial material.

Flakes are obviously the most controversial, and so they are saved for last.
The CLI is more broadly popular, but still is a lot of material to discuss.
The store-only subcommands are Nix's "plumbing" as opposed to "porcelain" commands, and thus have the simplest (if not most user-friendly) purposes.
This "dusty corner" of the new CLI is rather calm with a very constrained design space, and far less acrimony.

## Conclusion

By starting with this relatively easy material to stabilize, we can prove we can all come together as a community to agree on a design after all.
This should build trust between opposing individuals and factions, giving us a foundation upon which to tackle the more challenging material in subsequent steps.

> Since these features became very popular while they are still unstable, there is now both an urgency to stabilize them, and little ability to modify them.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Since these features became very popular while they are still unstable, there is now both an urgency to stabilize them, and little ability to modify them without breaking existing setups of users who relied on hopes
And claims of stabilization to happen soon.
```

See my other comment about flawed reasoning. Maybe this sentence should go away altogether.

This is the opposite of how experimental features are supposed to leisurely incubate with both plenty of flexibility to change them, and little rush to stabilize them until they feel ready.
But, there is little we can do about this at this point, an this RFC recognizes that fact and does *not* try to resist it.

> But, we have crossed that Rubicon and there is no turning back; this RFC *doesn't* attempt to change Flakes or the command line.

Reviewer 7: I don't know. I'm not convinced of this whole subsection because this does not align with the motivation stated before. Incremental stabilisation should instead allow room for reconsideration and systematically incorporating feedback and long-standing criticism. I read this RFC as an attempt to reconcile the experimental forays with the objection that not enough care has been taken with maintaining the core use cases, and just saying "well that train has left" doesn't fit that image at all.

- Should commands like `show-derivation` use `--json` by default?
- Flat vs hierarchical commands
- is `--derivation` a good flag?

## Step 3: Attempt likewise splitting a nix lang without flakes Nix

For the same reason that a store-only Nix is useful for validating the store-only CLI, and ensuring it works with many *possible* higher layers, it is also useful to build a Store + Nix lang -only Nix without Flakes.
Whether it or not it is possible to actually do this is left to the Nix Team to decide, but it should be at least considered/attempted.

## Step 4: Audit, refine, and stabilize the rest of the CLI, without Flakes

If the deadline for step 1 is *not* met, we jump directly to this step, skipping step 2.

This is the rest off the new CLI, without flakes.
Unlike the store-only Nix command which has yet to be implemented, this is easy to visualize today by enabling the `nix-command` feature without the `flakes` feature.
This is a chance to discuss topics like:

- Is `--file` good, or should we be able to specify something like `file#attribute` to mix files and attributes? (Without using Flakes.)
- Should all outputs be selected if one writes `foo.dev`?

> - How can `nix repl` have a more normal CLI?

Author: Basically the `repl-flakes` feature, but we might continue to fine-tune it.

## Step 5: Audit, refine, and stabilize Flakes itself

Finally, with the other less controversial interfaces stabilized, we can tackle the Flakes itself, the one remainder.
This will require future RFCs.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

Having laid out the plan, let us now return to how the current situation is characterized and see if the various facts that the factions orient themselves are respected.

## Flakes are very popular

> And they will be stabilized, with minimal delay.

Reviewer 15: Maybe calling it a "high priority"?

The hope is that such scaffolding will assuage this faction their concerns are heard without holding things up.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The main downside is a small delay from the splitting Nix process, and then delay between the stabilization steps.

The first delay has a guaranteed upper bound, thanks to its self-imposed deadline.
That maximum delay should be dwarfed by duration of time we've spent "in limbo" without a clear plan to move forward.
We therefore think that is a small and reasonable price to pay for the benefit of community harmony.

The second delays don't represent time "ideal" from a stabilization perspective.
As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, we don't see any problem.

**Step 0** is also designed to take the pressure off these possible sources of delay, giving us *something* to work on that is not blocked on RFC 134 or anything else.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

We could, of course, just "rip off the band-aid" and stabilize everything at once.
The argument for that would be that enough time has passed and the concerns of (less numerous) long-time users are not important.

> But we think the plan here has little downsides; we can instead make everyone happy with only a small delay.

Reviewer 7: Quantify small delay. I wouldn't  dare put time stamps on anything.

   - First, the non-Flakes CLI will be stabilized, in phases corresponding to Nix's architecture.

   - Afterwards, Flakes itself and its CLI components can be stabilized. The final design of Flakes will also require another RFC.

# Problem statement
[problem-statement]: #problem-statement

For the past few years, we've accumulated a massive backlog of unstable features in the form of the new command-line interface and flakes.
There is now a growing desire to stabilize those features, but as of yet no plan on exactly how to do so.
The tension between that desire and a lack of a clear plan has loomed over our heads for a while; this RFC aims to dispel it by providing a concrete plan, an plan that hopefully will mitigate the lingering controversies and tensions around Flakes.

## The situation so far

There are a few facts that must be introduced to give context to this situation.
We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live with them instead.

### Flakes are very popular

As measured in the community polls, Nix has a lot of new users, dwarfing the number of long-time users.

> Flakes is very popular among these new users.

Reviewer 8: Here's some **new** off-site documentation where people assume a general audience and do their best to write quite good tutorials which both take flakes as a starting point. I'm coming in from these and I imagine lots more people given how popular both these people are. Switching from flakes to non-flakes Nix for me at this point is jarring.

* https://mitchellh.com/writing/nix-with-dockerfiles
* https://fasterthanli.me/series/building-a-rust-service-with-nix/part-10

The detailed design of this RFC consists of these parts:

- Establishing Principles
    - Basic layering principles

    - Basic stabilization process principles

- Plan bringing Nix into compliance with the principles, and specifying the order the outstanding unstable CLI and Flakes features will be tackled.

## Layering principles

These basic layering principles will be added to the [Nix architecture documentation](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/architecture/architecture.html):

### For Nix as as a whole

- **Public Interfaces**

  Layers are not just an implementation detail, instead they are publically exposed to the user via stable interfaces
  All exposed interfaces in Nix, both for computers or humans, must be matched to layers

### For each layer

- **Clarity of purpose**

  Layers should not be too "thick".
  Layers should "do one thing, and do it well".

- **Compositionality**

  Layers should stand alone:

  - They should work as the top layer
  - They should also work *not* as the top layer, and with multiple possible layers above them
  - They should expose a clear interface, which is what makes the previous point possible.

- **Gravity**

>   Features should be in the lowest layer it makes sense to have them.

Reviewer 4: This is the opposite of what the RFC, with good reasons, proposes.

To promote experimentation, you want to push the technical features to the _low_ level. Whatever good new features end up in Nix, I want them available in `nix-store` and `nix-instantiate`, not only in `nix-env`. Then I can easily script around whatever drawbacks `nix-env` has for my use case.

If it isn't, we should at least make sure that it will be possible to do so later.
It is OK to stabilize features that violate the layering principles, *only* so long as their stability does not impede fixing those violations later.

# Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

Having laid out the plan, let us now return to how the current situation is characterized and see if the various facts that the factions orient themselves are respected.

## Layering principles

Rammifications to the user experience from layering being public:

  - The user has the option (it need not be mandatory!) to be aware of the layering and use it to learn Nix

  - Both perspectives are equally valid, and neither is prioritized over the other

  - While not going so far as to *insist* users are aware of layering and care about it, the layered archicture of Nix should be exposed to anyone that cares, and it shouldn't suddenly dissapear (as a mere implementation detail might).

Some examples of ways the principles are upheld:

- It is possible to use store without Nix lang
  - (**publicity**, **compositionality**)

>   - Need `nix add-derivation` or similar to make this true!

Reviewer 11: This has been resolved! In Nix 2.15, `nix derivation add` was added! See [2.15 Release Notes](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/release-notes/rl-2.15.html)

Author: Yes, I've been chipping away at the todo list here :). I am not sure that means we should remove them at out of date --- I sort of like examples of refinements of individual modules successfully performed, to provide evidence that we can efficiently "refine and clean up layers".

(The implicit contrast is would be that often deciding between options for future changes to Flakes/Fetchers is much harder because the design space is so wide open, there are not clear answers (Platonism cannot help us) and it's easier to get stuck.)

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The main downside is a delay from the splitting Nix process, and then a delay between the stabilization steps.

The fact that [RFC 134] is already mostly implemented, and in code review, is hopefully reason enough to believe it shouldn't take much longer.
That maximum delay waiting for that to complete should be dwarfed by duration of time we've spent "in limbo" without a clear plan to move forward.
We therefore think that is a small and reasonable price to pay for the benefit of community harmony.

An addition, in the detailed design there is an escape hatch saying that blocking on the implementation of [RFC 134] can be reconsidered things do indeed take longer than foreseen.

The delay of "auditing and refining" and shouldn't represent time "idle" from a stabilization perspective.
As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, we don't see any problem.

**Step 0** is also designed to take the pressure off these possible sources of delay, giving us *something* to work on that is not blocked on [RFC 134] or anything else.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

> We could, of course, just "rip off the band-aid" and stabilize everything at once.

Reviewer 16: One alternative could be to break flake under a new name or call this v1 and announce that v2 will have breaking changes. [semver](https://semver.org/) write

> increment the MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes

This describes could apply to the current usecase as it's what major versions are there for.

Author: Yeah the issue right now is not *having* multiple versions of Flakes, it's *maintaining* them. When there are not clear layer boundaries (bits of Flakes stuff all around `libexpr` and `libcmd`), the maintainence cost of 1 Flakes, let alone 2 Flakes(!), is much higher.

If we do succeed in make Flakes a separate project (my dream, not proposed as part of this RFC as written). Then yes, now the maintainence cost is much better. Out-of-tree front-ends can do whatever they want!

---

> feature: stabilize-incrementally

Reviewer 6: The layering was developed and added explicitly to ensure there was a proper separation between concerns. Title can be better, but it seems the intention was communicated. Thanks!

start-date: 2022-09-15
author: John Ericson

> co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)

Reviewer 17: Is this still supposed to say “(find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)” even though it’s been merged?

2. Establish an incremental plan adhering to the principles deciding on the order and priority in which to stabilize these features:

   - First, the non-Flakes CLI will be stabilized, in phases corresponding to Nix's architecture.

   - Afterwards, Flakes itself and its CLI components can be stabilized. The final design of Flakes will also require another RFC.

# Problem statement
[problem-statement]: #problem-statement

For the past few years, we've accumulated a massive backlog of unstable features in the form of the new command-line interface and flakes.
There is now a growing desire to stabilize those features, but as of yet no plan on exactly how to do so.
The tension between that desire and a lack of a clear plan has loomed over our heads for a while; this RFC aims to dispel it by providing a concrete plan, a plan that hopefully will mitigate the lingering controversies and tensions around Flakes.

## The situation so far

There are a few facts that must be introduced to give context to this situation.
We can't change these short of a time machine, so we must find a way to live with them instead.

### Flakes are very popular

> As measured in the community polls, Nix has a lot of new users, dwarfing the number of long-time users.

Reviewer 17: I would add a link to one or two of the polls.

Reviewer 6: https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2022-nix-survey-results/18983

Some people were upset the Flakes RFC was abandoned but the feature merged.
Other people were fine with experimental features being merged without RFC, but were upset because Flakes never really *felt* experimental.
Experimental features are expected to be subject to community feedback, modified a lot based upon that feedback, and, most importantly, *discouraged* from being used in production.

### Flakes are criticized for encroaching on other features

There are many criticisms about Flakes.
But one of them especially relevant to stabilizing is a perception that Flakes have encroached on other new features, in the sense that it ought to be possible to use those other features without Flakes but isn't in practice.
For example, there is no reason in theory that pure evaluation of Nix expressions requires Flakes.
But without the ability to populate some sort of initial list of store paths that are safe to import, pure evaluation does in practice require Flakes.

This is especially noticeable for new CLI features that *previously did*, in fact, work without Flakes.

> For example, in earlier versions of Nix, `nix search` worked without Flakes.

Reviewer 18: This is my main issue with the current CLI state. The RFC text further down kind of hints at that this will be fixed, but it is too vague to be certain.

Explicitly mentioning `nix search` as an example would make me a lot more in favor of this RC ;)

Reviewer 5: Another is the error message you get from `nix run` on an expression that isn't a derivation:

```
$ nix eval -f . libcIconv
<LAMBDA>
$ nix run -f . libcIconv
error: attribute 'type' does not exist
```

A lot of the code paths that can be used for both flakes and non-flakes appear to have had the error handling removed from the non-flake case and replaced with "`goto assume-it-is-a-flake`".

Author: @piegamesde so I/we purposely didn't want to state that stabilizing is blocked on developing new nin-flake eatures that probably wouldn't inform the final design of flakes. Even though those things used to work pre flakes given the state of the code today it is a new feature.

However, on a personal level, I do help it will be done first.

Reviewer 18: IMO, the stabilization of flakes should not happen without having at least feature parity with the old CLI when flakes are disabled. I don't agree with framing that as a "new feature".

Personally, I'd additionally like to have that *all* CLI features that get stabilized must also work with flakes disabled. But I understand if that's too much to ask for.

Reviewer 19: That would be okay by me, but let's not extend the scope of the PR further for now, it's a net positive as is.

- **Gravity**

  Features should be in the lowest layer it makes sense to have them.

## The general stabilization process --- audit, refine, and *then* stabilze

See the [current documentation on experimental features and their lifecyle](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/contributing/experimental-features.html).

Stabilization of any feature, not just the CLI or Flakes, is not a matter of just flipping a switch on an implementation that has accrued for a period of time.
Because the moment before stabilization is our last chance to make major changes, it is crucial that we look over what is being stabilized.

To stabilize a piece of functionality (experimental -> stable in flowchart in linked documentation) we must do these things:

1. **Audit the functionality**

   Make note of the current state.
   Do this publicly so the Nix community at large has a chance to weigh in.

   Checklist during audit:

   - **Documentation**

     Ideally the feature is already well-documented and the audit brings up nothing new.
     But if it isn't, it must be by the end of the audit.

   - **Whole feature flag, not part of a feature flag**

>      It should be possible to enable just the experimental that is ready for stabilization *in isolation*, without also enabling other unstable functionality that is not ready for stabilization.

Reviewer 17: This should say “It should be possible to enable just the experimental **features** that[…]”

## Layering principles

Ramifications to the user experience from layering being public:

  - The user has the option (it need not be mandatory!) to be aware of the layering and use it to learn Nix

  - Both perspectives are equally valid, and neither is prioritized over the other

  - While not going so far as to *insist* users are aware of layering and care about it, the layered archicture of Nix should be exposed to anyone that cares, and it shouldn't suddenly dissapear (as a mere implementation detail might).

Some examples of ways the principles are upheld:

- It is possible to use the Nix store without the Nix language
  - (**publicity**, **compositionality**)
  - Need `nix add-derivation` or similar to make this true!

- It possible to use other languages with the store
  - (**compositionality**)
  - Guix able to use Nix daemon is a possible way to demonstrate this is true.
- It is possible to use the Nix language without Flakes
  - (**compositionality**)
  - True already
- It is possible to use pure eval without flakes
  - (**gravity**, because "pure eval" is a feature not a layer)

>   - 95% true, but some "last mile" functionality is needed to make this "ergonomic enough for people to beleive it"

Reviewer 20: ```suggestion
  - 95% true, but some "last mile" functionality is needed to make this "ergonomic enough for people to believe it"
```

An addition, in the detailed design there is an escape hatch saying that blocking on the implementation of [RFC 134] can be reconsidered if things do indeed take longer than foreseen.

The delay of "auditing and refining" shouldn't represent time "idle" from a stabilization perspective.
As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, we don't see any problem.

**Step 0** is also designed to take the pressure off these possible sources of delay, giving us *something* to work on that is not blocked on [RFC 134] or anything else.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

We could, of course, just "rip off the band-aid" and stabilize everything at once.
The argument for that would be that enough time has passed and the concerns of (less numerous) long-time users are not important.
But we think the plan here has little downsides; we can instead make everyone happy with only some delay.
If that is true, why not do that instead!

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

None at this time.

# Future work
[future]: #future-work

> Generalization features to work without Flakes, like pure eval and search, might be desired by the Flake-skeptic faction, but is purposely left as future work in order to not delay stabilization.

Reviewer 17: I think that you meant to write “Generalizing” instead of “Generalization”. Also, I would move the parenthetical and replace its commas with parentheses to make the sentence easier to understand. In other words, I would change it to “Generalizing features (like pure eval and search) to work without Flakes might be desired by the Flake-skeptic faction[…]”

---
feature: stabilize-incrementally
start-date: 2022-09-15
author: John Ericson
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: @thufschmitt @tomberek @infinisil
shepherd-leader: @tomberek
related-issues: (will contain links to implementation PRs)
---

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Ever since the closing of [RFC 49](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/49), we've had the new CLI and Flakes marked as experimental, with no clear plan forward.

Reviewer 6: Yes. A formal definition and stablization of flakes is reserved for step 5.

     If we have an RFC, the release candidate experimental feature should match the RFC.

2. **Hold "Final Comment Period" for refinements of the functionality**

   It is reasonable to notice things that were not noticed before the audit.
   Features can either be changed, or they can be carefully carved out as ineligible for stabilization at this time, and left to be dealt with in a later round of this process.

   Note that for large, complex, and controversial features, an RFC is also required (per usual) to advance to the next step.
   The auditing and FCP for the feature in this case take place under the auspices of the RFC process.

3. **Actually stabilize**

   Only this last step is "stabilization proper".
   This should be nothing more than removing a feature flag that has made it though the previous steps.

## CLI in waves, then Flakes

As discussed in the motivation, we want to stabilize the less controversial Flake-agnostic new CLI before Flakes.
In addition, the CLI can itself be split up for more fine-grained rounds of stabilization.
According to the layering principles, the CLI in fact *must* be split in order to abide by the **publicity** principle.

> The rounds thus look like this:

Author: I think the ordering is normative, we do not know what the final result each step will look, but we are committing to doing them in this order?

1. CLI
   1. "installable"-free Store-only CLI
   2. Rest of the Store-only CLI (includes "derived path" installables)
   3. Rest of the flake-agnostic CLI

2. Flakes
   - Define the different layers of Nix?
   - Make Nix conform to these layers?

## Combined plan

> Step 1 is technical work, with a self-imposed deadline so we can be sure it doesn't delay stabilization too long.

Author: ```suggestion
Step 1 is technical work, with a self-imposed deadline so we can be sure it doesn't delay stabilization too long.
```

> Step 1 is technical work, with a self-imposed deadline so we can be sure it doesn't delay stabilization too long.

Author: ```suggestion
Step 1 is technical work.
```

> Step 1 is technical work, with a self-imposed deadline so we can be sure it doesn't delay stabilization too long.

Author: OK! no more deadline.

- Flat vs hierarchical commands
- is `--derivation` a good flag? ([Nix issue #7261](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/7261))

### Step 3: Attempt likewise splitting a store-and-language-only Nix

For the same reason that a store-only Nix is useful for validating the store-only CLI, and ensuring it works with many *possible* higher layers, it is also useful to build a store-and-language-only Nix, without Flakes.
Whether or not it is possible to actually do this is left to the Nix Team to decide, but it should be at least considered.

### Step 4: Audit, refine, and stabilize the store-and-language-only Nix CLI

This is the rest off the new CLI, without Flakes.
Unlike the store-only Nix command which has yet to be implemented, this is easy to visualize today by enabling the `nix-command` feature without the `flakes` feature.
This is a chance to discuss topics like:

- Is `--file` good, or should we be able to specify something like `file#attribute` to mix files and attributes? (Without using Flakes.)
- ~~Should all outputs be selected if one writes `foo.dev`?~~ Since fixed.
- How can `nix repl` have a more normal CLI?

> Following the **gravity** principle, we will eventually want to pure eval and eval caching to be possible and easy to use without flakes; they should become part of this layer.

Author: The "eventually" was supposed to match the other text saying this is desired, but not a blocker for stabilization

  - (**compositionality**)
  - Guix able to use Nix daemon is a possible way to demonstrate this is true.
- It is possible to use the Nix language without Flakes
  - (**compositionality**)
  - True already
- It is possible to use pure eval without flakes
  - (**gravity**, because "pure eval" is a feature not a layer)
  - 95% true, but some "last mile" functionality is needed to make this "ergonomic enough for people to beleive it"

Also, because public aspects of Nix are subject to a (nebulous) stability promise, exposing layering publically necessarily means stabilizing aspects of that layering too.
The precise details are not formally worked about, but one example would be:

 - We shouldn't collapse layers that were distinct such that people that are using the former lower layer in isolation are suddenly forced to "pay" for something they aren't using (the former upper layer).

In the future, we might build atop this principles for a deeper notion of modularity: one should be able to replace the implementation of the layer with a different one, while using the same implementations of any layers above and below.
This is desirable but not currently required. E.g.:

>    - There does exist multiple stores, that should continue to work (and work better than it does today)

Author: https://www.quora.com/Why-do-so-many-native-English-speakers-use-there-is-theres-instead-of-there-are-with-plural-nouns-e-g-theres-some-books-when-according-to-grammar-it-should-be-there-are-some-books :D

We therefore think that is a small and reasonable price to pay for the benefit of community harmony.

An addition, in the detailed design there is an escape hatch saying that blocking on the implementation of [RFC 134] can be reconsidered things do indeed take longer than foreseen.

The delay of "auditing and refining" and shouldn't represent time "idle" from a stabilization perspective.
As long as we are making progress stabilizing features and having healthy discussions, we don't see any problem.

**Step 0** is also designed to take the pressure off these possible sources of delay, giving us *something* to work on that is not blocked on [RFC 134] or anything else.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

We could, of course, just "rip off the band-aid" and stabilize everything at once.
The argument for that would be that enough time has passed and the concerns of (less numerous) long-time users are not important.
But we think the plan here has little downsides; we can instead make everyone happy with only some delay.
If that is true, why not do that instead!

> # Unresolved questions

Reviewer 7: Let me preface this with appreciation for the work the author/shepherd team did to get things written down. The following is not to dismiss any of that, to the contrary, and is aiming to follow the practice of RFCs piling up considerations in order to help converging on a reasonable solution design.

Overall, I think the scope is too broad. There are many generally agreeable statements in there, but they tend to be vague and largely inconsequential. Regardless, I expect some of them to produce both some enlightening and some needless contention when scrutinized. I think this hasn't really happened yet, because the text is also still quite long for what it's trying to say, although it seems to have improved since the first versions.

Going in some more detail, the broad technical strokes seem fine, but could be a lot more concrete – if there is even anything to debate about them, that would be uncovered by delving into the actual design questions. That of course begs the question if there should be more RFCs detailing individual aspects (which is what Graham suggested in the post referenced here) or if some of those issues can be addressed as PRs. Many proposed statements can be managed easily within the Nix maintainers team and merged into official documentation directly.

Which brings me to the conceptual part: I understand this document is mainly about building trust and community consensus, but the problem statement and motivation is formulated only very weakly. What exactly is wrong with flakes not being stable? What exactly are the problems under discussion, and which trade-offs have to be considered for making a decision? Who are these "some people", and why does their opinion matter? To be precise, why is it that we can't just either remove the experimental flags xor remove the experimental feature itself? This would be important to state so readers can judge whether the problem is relevant and stated truthfully, whether the weighing of considerations is appropriate, and why the given conclusions are more reasonable than the alternatives.

Finally, I'm missing a consideration of project objectives and resource constraints. For instance, we can't really talk about timing. So far we didn't even manage to talk about order of work done, although we did succeed at agreeing on some priorities, such as improving testing and fixing bugs. Also, who is supposed to implement the changes? And wouldn't the proposed steps be taken regardless of this discussion anyway? Do Nix maintainers really need to request for comments to go about changes incrementally, as they do already? And for far-reaching changes, where I think it would be sensible to open a broader discussion, where is the threshold and should we take on even more of those instead of finishing one thing first?
For example, how do the issues in this RFC relate to substantial proposed changes such as layered stores or store ACLs?

Not addressing that would make this proposal, especially in light of its emphasis on popularity and people waiting for things, amount to saying "done when it's done, maybe never". Which would be absolutely no improvement over the current state of affairs.

Reviewer 11: I've tried to formulate multiple answers to this comment because I felt it was quite a harsh take, but every time I tried to argue against it, I have to concede that you are correct.

This RFC has already influenced discussions AFAICT, but the substance is so broad that it's questionable whether merging it would have any impact internally beyond that. It's still valuable as a document to show what the current challenges are, but merging it seems to be inconsequential.

Author: I think the basic issue is that when I started writing this, I felt like very much an outsider to Nix's development, and the ideas expressed in here felt like outsider/underdog ideas. Now, I am on the Nix Team (!), and there are some other like-minded people on the Nix team, and the most pro-Flakes people don't seem to be pouncing on this RFC keeping high pressure to compromise.

If people don't show up to argue back, then yes it is tempting to revise this to be something a lot stiffer. E.g. my personal  "dream" roadmap:

 - Flakes, most of `nix-env`, `nix profile` and other ancillary features would be ripped out as separate downstream projects.
   - "Most of `nix-env`" would be legacy compat shim, more or less frozen interfaces
   - New tools (Flakes, `nix profile`, etc.) can do whatever they want.

 - Nix is stripped down to its core, focus is equally on Bindings, nice RPC protocols, SDKs, and CLI. The (freed from compat constraint) CLI would aim for being auto-generated (as @fricklerhandwerk mentions) over being ergonomic, whenever the two conflict
   - Also make plans to get off C++ within 2 years

- Major focus of any new features is low latency rebuilds (avoiding mass rebuilds, more fine-grained derivations, inotify) and thus pitching Nix as not just the "post-package manager" but a credible Bazel competitor.

- Windows support on the same tier as macOS.

- Standardize the "store layer" (store objects, derivations, etc.) with the IETF.

I guess I *could* go write *that* RFC. And yes, it would be a lot sharper. But I assume the vast majority of people here would be like "wtf is that I'm so confused?". I am I mistaken?

Reviewer 11: It's tough, but I see what you mean. This is a good start. Having it codified would be a good checkpoint. There's nothing more for me to add. I think there are comments of me left, but after the recent changes I don't have anything more to say.

I guess it's time for FCP?

Reviewer 19: Even if this RFC isn't great, it's not bad either, it definitely doesn't make things worse. I'd like accept this RFC as is just so we can move on and focus on more concrete efforts: https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/136#pullrequestreview-1530539951
